>> Hello.
I'm Georgia Shakti-Hill, and
we have a very special program
for you.
We do have the honor of having
with us two wise men of Peru.
They are bringing the
ancient teachings to us,
the energy of the condor
coming to the eagle.
Come join us.
[THEME MUSIC]
We have had programs
where we have
been able to introduce to you
some of the major religions
of the world.
It is always wonderful to
go back to the ancient times
and know how those traditions
and those religions
are really helping us today.
And it is an honor to have with
us two gentlemen from Peru, who
have brought the wisdom
and the tradition
of the ancient anchors and
through today, the gifts
that they are sharing.
So I would like to
welcome both of you.
>> Thank you.
>> It is wonderful
to have you here.
We have Dr. Theo Paredes
who is the anthropologist.
>> Yes.
>> And we have Ruben Orellana,
who is the archaeologist.
>> Yes.
>> So you have been
trained in the academics,
but your heart is with the
teachings that you have learned
of the ancient
healing traditions.
Is this so?
>> I think Peru is a
particular country,
like also Ecuador and Bolivia,
and some other countries like
even Mexico, I
think, and here, too,
where the old culture
is still alive.
Particularly in
Peru, we might say
that maybe 60% of
the population are
natives, which are the direct
descendants from the Inca time.
>> Yes.
>> We still speak the Quechua,
which was the main language
during that time.
So before we went to
a school or before we
went to start our teachings
from the academy--
>> Yes.
>> --all this wisdom and
knowledge were surrounding
to us.
So we grow with it.
>> Yes, as children it
was part of your life.
>> Part of our culture,
our life, our tradition.
So when we went into the
university, the only thing,
we start to put some frames
to see what was going on,
but it is part of our life.
>> So the culture of your
country and the history
of the Incans and so forth
then actually was just framed
through your work
at the university.
>> Yeah, that's
what I think, too.
>> Uh-huh.
Now, we do have a map of Peru.
And both of you are from Cusco.
>> Cusco, yes.
>> Which is the capital.
And it's also known as
the Navel of the World.
Is that because it's center?
>> Yes, but the
explanation from this,
in some ways it comes
from two points.
One, that any culture,
any human group in order
to start something new,
they look for a place,
for a center, from where they're
going to begin to organize what
for them is the chaos.
So it became to
be the axis mundi.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> That's one explanation.
>> Yes.
>> The other one is that
people who was before us,
they were more
related with nature,
with the laws that
commanded nature.
>> Yes.
>> And they were looking
for a place such as Cusco,
which is a vortex of energy.
>> A vortex?
Oh, a power center, sure.
>> Yes.
>> Uh-huh.
>> So they called
this the navel.
And maybe they were long ago
ahead of what is going on now,
because also the Dalai
Lama says years ago
that the center of
energy of this planet
has been changing or
moving from the Himalayas
into the Andes area.
>> Yes.
>> So it confirms that these
people knew where they were
looking in order to make
a settlement to start this
society.
>> Yes, well, we have been
hearing about Machu Picchu
as being one of those places
that people are drawn to.
They absolutely
love Machu Picchu,
and we have a picture here
of the Andes behind it.
And Machu Picchu is one
of those power centers
that people are drawn to.
>> Yeah.
Machu Picchu is a crystal city.
>> Crystal city, yes, uh-huh.
>> Because the geological
composition of this place is
the white granite stone.
And we when you take the
granite stone, you find quartz.
Like [INAUDIBLE] inside
there's a composition
to this geologic area.
Machu Picchu with
this is very special,
because you find
a lot of crystals
in the walls, in the floor,
and everyplace around.
And the crystals move
a very special energy
with high frequency.
>> Yes.
>> And Machu Picchu, too,
is in a very high place.
And around you have
the many, many apus.
"Apu" in our language,
that's ceremonial hills.
>> Yes.
>> And each one, too,
is a vortex of energy.
Picchus, that is the
original name to the city,
not Machu Picchu.
>> Just Picchu.
>> Machu Picchu is the
name to the one hill.
>> Oh.
>> Picchus in general, because
around you find all these
hills.
Each one is a vortex of energy.
You are more or
less in the middle
to this energy from this
area close to Cusco.
>> Now, your responsibility
in your job is that you are
a consultant, and you
work with Machu Picchu.
You have found additional
information about it
as you have studied?
>> Yeah, years ago,
many years ago,
I am the chief archaeologist
from Machu Picchu from this
national park.
But I started my
archaeology work in 1975,
in exploring and digging
in this national park.
And in 1987, I discovered
a new archaeological site
around to Machu Picchu, because
the information about the city
is referenced is the
last city of the Incas.
>> The last city of the Incas.
>> In some way,
but it's not true,
because around you find
many a small village.
>> Ah.
>> And to Machu Picchu
come in seven Inca trails.
It's not only one.
And I explore, and
I find one more
to connect the Urubamba Valley
to the next valley is Lucumayo.
This is a nice,
beautiful Inca trail.
This are the proof it's
not an isolated city.
This city is in connection
with many others.
>> Well, we have some Incan art,
which is absolutely beautiful.
But what I'm thinking about
with what you have said,
and here we have some of the
Incan art that has been found.
>> Naymlap.
>> Yes.
>> Naymlap is the figure
which is in the left side now.
And this is one of the gods
from the north of Peru.
>> Oh.
Uh-huh.
>> He is like the Viracocha,
who was a wise man who came.
He's a mythical
hero, that he came.
And he started to teach all
the knowledge to our people.
This Naymlap is from
the north part of Peru.
And he came, and
he made a kingdom,
which name was Yampellec,
which now became Lambayeque
in Spanish, that we Lambayeque.
And for us, the
hero was Viracocha.
>> Ah.
Well, what I've seen then,
from what you're talking about,
too, the crystal city has
the crystals buried in it.
So there's still the beauty
of the natural environment,
but then there is some
of the wonderful artworks
from the Incas that
you still have,
too, that are probably
in the museum in Cusco?
>> Yes, yes.
And something which
makes us very proud
is that recently,
there has been--
well, not so recently,
but maybe 10 years ago,
they found what
the archaeologist
has been calling the
second most important
find after Tutankhamen.
>> Oh.
>> It's a very, very big find
about the Senor of Sipan,
the Lord of Sipan.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Which really was a huge
pyramid, a clay pyramid.
And under 14 meters, they
found this royal tomb,
which is very, very impressive,
with all these ceremonial--
with all these people around.
And they have been
digging and finding more.
They call now the
second Lord of Sipan,
which were in this big pyramid.
>> So it's the second
to Tutankhamen's.
>> Yes, it's very impressive.
>> Wonderful.
>> It's very impressive.
>> I mentioned at the
beginning of this,
the condor and the eagle.
And there is the prophecy
that South America represents
the condor or the heart,
and North America the eagle
and the head, and that there
is a message that is coming,
as the Dalai Lama
had said, there's
so much power now in the Andes.
But do you feel that there is
like a message of love that
is coming from South
America to North America,
and that's why people are
so thrilled to have you here
with us doing your teaching?
>> That something is
happening we cannot deny.
>> Uh-huh.
>> That some changes in
the mentality of the world,
it's happening.
We can see this.
>> Uh-huh.
>> Even now, we call a new age.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> OK, so it's not because we
just are the new generation,
who has more consciousness
about the Earth or whatever.
I think we have such
a biological clock
in our body, which
move according
to the time with the Earth.
>> Yes.
>> Because we are linked
to the Mother Earth.
And now it's time for us to open
this biological Clock that's
why we are looking and searching
for this spiritual growth,
because the new time is coming.
>> Well, I mentioned the condor,
and you have a beautiful--
and if you would
show us the condor.
You have a symbol.
And what is it that
the condor represents?
And if you could hold it
up so that we can see it,
it's absolutely beautiful.
>> Yes, this is a shell, a
[INAUDIBLE] shell which has
been carved.
It maybe has 800 or 900
years old, this piece.
>> Oh, wow.
>> OK, so you can see from one
side and from the other side.
>> That's absolutely gorgeous.
>> And for us in our cosmic
vision, we have three levels.
We have an inner world.
We have this world.
And we have a high level world.
>> Yes.
>> OK?
But in this, in the inner world,
is the cosmic womb, the Mother
Earth, where everything
is transformed.
Everything goes back there
and becomes something new.
>> Well, I wanted to--
we're going to take a break.
But what I thought
was such a blessing
is that at the beginning of--
before we started this show,
you actually did a blessing,
and you did a chanting,
and you brought in
the energies for us.
We want to talk more
about that energy, too.
But we need to take a break.
So if you will stay tuned,
we will be right back
with the ancient
teachings of the Andes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If you are just
joining us, we have
been talking with two
of the wise men of Peru,
an anthropologist
and archaeologist,
and they were explaining
to us about the condor.
And that is a consciousness that
is the higher consciousness.
And bridging the world between
the physical and the spiritual,
all of us want to be raised to
that higher consciousness that
is represented by the condor.
And we are so pleased
again, Theo and Ruben,
to have you with us.
And we are talking about the
shaman and the teachings that
are so ancient.
And you said that's
just one of the tribes,
but we have the Q'ero, you
said are the most well known
of the shaman of Peru.
>> Yes.
It's very important to remember
the name to the Inca empire.
The name of the Incan
empire is the Tawantinsuyu.
Tawan is "four".
Suyus are regions.
And this is the empire
to the four regions.
And you have many
different ethnic groups
in this moment in Peru, in
between to Peru and Bolivia.
>> Yes.
>> And all these knowledges from
the Inca and pre-Inca time come
with oral tradition.
And you have many
different communities.
You have the Q'eros.
They handle all these knowledges
and preserve some tradition
from the Inca time.
But you have other group,
too, very important
around the Titicaca Lake.
That's the Collas.
And here in this place, the
priests, the name to the priest
is Kallawayas.
In general, descent is
from all these persons,
this is the shamans.
But in our country,
each one have a name.
>> Yes.
>> In Quechua, that is a paqo.
In Aymara, that is Kallawaya.
And you have the same,
too, in the jungle.
Because in the
jungle, you have all
the different ethnic groups.
>> Yes.
>> Like these people is
working, too, with the plants,
medicine plants of the jungle.
And you have the same
because these places,
these Incan places
are really huge.
And now it's in different
countries, right?
You have Edcuador.
You have Peru.
You have Bolivia and Chile.
For example, in Chile,
you have the machis.
That's a woman.
>> Yes.
>> That's a shaman woman.
>> Ah, the shaman woman.
I was just gonna ask you, if you
were to define it in English,
how would you define shaman?
Is it the holy man?
Is it the healer?
Is it the teacher, in
the case of the woman?
In each of the oral traditions
that are passed down
through the time
of the Incas, each
have come to the
different tribes.
Is that it?
And what is the shaman?
What is their role?
>> I think the shaman is the
man who has been reaching two
things--
the harmony in himself,
and the harmony between him
and the nature and
environment worlds.
>> Ah, I see.
OK.
>> And he's the one who can
share this with other people.
>> Yes.
>> Because healing, health,
good luck, whatever you name it,
it is nought but our money.
If everything's in harmony,
everything fits in its place.
>> If it is in harmony.
Yes.
>> That's all.
>> There was an absolutely
beautiful blessing that you
gave us, and we do
have it on tape.
You could not begin the
program without the blessing
of the space, and
can you tell us?
We're going to be pulling up a
tape here of what we had done.
We have the mesa, is
what it is called.
>> Yes.
>> And that's the layout
of the crystals and things.
Can you tell us a
little bit about what
we're going to see on this?
What did you do?
>> OK.
We think that the Mother
Earth is a live being.
So whatever we go, we
don't have frontiers.
We don't have borders.
We are yes in the Mother Earth.
>> Yes.
>> But each place
has its own energy,
its own spiritual energy.
So when we take
for granted that we
are the owner of this property
or the owner of this land,
we are not owners of nothing.
>> Yeah.
>> We are just here
to share what we have.
>> Yes.
>> This beautiful planet, this
beautiful time that we call
our life.
But sometimes we live in
the past and in the future.
We doesn't exist.
The past is already gone,
and future doesn't exist.
We have to live in the present,
which is our best gift.
That's why they
call it "present."
So we open this mesa with
these little objects, which
carry some kind of energy, or
it has been from the elders
like this condor.
>> Yes.
>> So with this, we ask in this
space to the energy that is
handed this space
to allow us to work.
We ask for the permission
to sit here, to be with you,
and to bless all of
us, or everything
that we are doing here.
>> Yes.
>> And it is not but to reach
with the chanting and with this
object some
frequencies of energy,
so we can reach in this
level with our feeling.
Sometimes our mind
goes faster, but when
we start to learn our
self, our intuition,
we start to perceive that there
is something more than that.
>> Yes.
>> And that's this ceremony,
basically what has been done.
Opening this space for us.
>> Yes, as I told you,
we usually begin each
of our programs with a prayer.
But you did that so beautifully.
You created a sacred
space here for all of us
in blessing this area.
And it was all
also, you said, as
if you were asking
permission to share,
but you had to first
bless the area.
>> Yes.
>> And the chanting and
the rhythm, that has--
>> We have this kind of perfume,
that we call this florida
water.
>> Yes.
>> And when you go to any
place and you have flowers,
or you put perfume, you are
talking about frequencies.
Perfumes come in frequencies.
>> Yes.
>> So when you spray
wherever you go this perfume,
you change the frequency.
So it's very nice
to have flowers.
It's very nice to have perfume.
It's very nice to smile.
>> Yes.
>> Because then you start
to change the energy which
surrounds you.
>> Yes.
And that's what the
spraying of the water was,
the florida, the flower water.
>> And the rattling,
and the rattling,
it is because man has been
discovering that through
the rattle, through drums, and
the voice are able to change
the frequencies, and it's
able to reach into you.
Sometimes we don't know why
we give a rattle to a baby.
>> Yes.
>> And say, OK, give
a rattle to a baby.
And the baby starts
to rattle them.
And they say, OK, it gets
calm, and it gets happy.
>> Uh-huh.
>> And we don't know that the
baby when it's rattling is
changing the frequency of
energy around it, around them.
So they become calm.
>> Yes.
>> That's how it works.
>> Oh, now, see, I had never
thought of the baby rattle,
but it does.
It changes that energy.
And that's what we're
talking about so much today
really is energy, isn't it?
And the healing energy
and this whole idea
of the energy that both of
you create where you go.
And that's why
people are so honored
to have you come and share
your wisdom with them.
>> Thank you.
>> We share what somebody
else has been sharing with us.
>> Yes.
And I think also, and here
here's the beautiful mesa
is what you call the lay.
And I wish we could have
even seen how beautifully you
set each piece at its place.
And each one, I'm sure, has a
very special and sacred aspect
to IT a purpose
that it fulfills.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Yeah, the mesa
is like the cosmos.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> In your mesa, you can
represent all the cosmos.
You have the left side,
you have the right side,
you have the middle part.
So you have the left
side, which is the past.
You have the middle part,
which is the present.
And you have the right
side, which is the future.
>> Yes.
>> But then you have
four directions,
which is the four
directions of the universe,
which is the four seasons.
And you have a middle part.
And in the middle part is
the center, where you are.
And this center is connected
with the inner world,
with the Mother Earth, and
with the Cosmic Father.
And you are in between of them.
>> It has been an
absolute blessing,
and I am so honored to have
had you with your ancient
teachings, sharing
with us today.
Thank you.
And thank you, Rube.
>> Thank you so much.
>> And we would love to have
you be in touch with them.
And if you will
stay tuned, we'll
let you know how
you can do that.
[THEME MUSIC]
Richard Bassil is our contact
with these wise men of Peru,
and he was kind enough
to bring them to us.
And also if you are interested
in having perhaps a ceremony
and they have the
special despacho, which
is an intensive and some
lots of programming,
and we are so pleased that they
are coming here to the United
States, and perhaps it
might be something that
would be appropriate for you.
Until next time, I'm
Georgia Shakti-Hill.
May you be well,
happy, and peaceful.
[THEME MUSIC]